Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very 
close to it whan he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite 
structure or building, hhe dwells only on broad impressions of vast angles 
and stone surfaces - surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper 
for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hierolyphs. I mention 
his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of 
his awful dreams. He said that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was 
abnormal, non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and 
dimmensions apart from ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing 
whilst gazing at the terrible reality. 

Johansen and his men landed at a slopin mud-bank on this monstrous 
Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could 
have beeen no mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted 



{28 

when viewed through the polarising miasma welling out from thiss 
sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in 
those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance hewed 
concavity after the first shewed convexity. 

Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything 
more definite than rock and ooze and weedx was seen. Each would have fled 
had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-heartedly that 
they searched - vainly, as it proved - for some portable souvenir to bear 
away. 

It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith 
and shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked 
curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon 
bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that 
it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, 
though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise 
like a outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the 
place was all wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were 
horixontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed 
phantasmally variable. 

Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan 
felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he 
went. He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding - that 
is, one would cal it climbing if the thing was not after all horjizontal - and 
the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, 
very softly and slowly, the acre-great lintel began to give inward at the top; 
and they saw that it was balanced. 

Donovan slid or soehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and 
rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the 
monstrously carven portal. In this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved 
anomalously in a diagonall way, so that all the rules of matter and 
perspective seemed upset. 



29 

The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness 
was indeed a positive quality ; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls 
as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its 
aeon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into te 
shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. The odour 
rising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the 
quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. 
Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered 
slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green 
immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that 
poison city of madnessx. 

Poor Johansen's hhandwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the 
six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright 
in that accursed instant. The Thing cannot be described - there is no 
language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such 
eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain 
walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great 
architect went mad, and poor Wilco raved with fever in that telepathic 
instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had 
awaked to claim his own. The stars were right again, and what an age-old 
cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by 
ajccident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and 
ravening for delight. 

Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody tturned. God 
rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, 
Guerrera, and Angtrom. Parker slipped as the other three were lunging 
frenziedly over endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and 
Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which 
shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it 
were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled 
desperately for the Alkert as the mountainous monstrosity lopped down the 
slimy stones and hesitated, floundering at the edge of the water.

Steam had not been suffered to go down exntirely, despite the departure of 
all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of 
feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Alert 
under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, 
she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel 
shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and 
gibbered like Polyphxeme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder 
than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and 
began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden 
looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at 
intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was 
wandering deliriouzly. }

